---
author: tjones
comments: false
date: 2013-05-17 17:51:08+00:00
layout: post
slug: debt-ceiling-shakedown-2013-3
title: Debt Ceiling Shakedown 2013
wordpress_id: 971
categories:
- old
tags:
- Old
- Republican Party
- Social Security
- Supreme Court
- Tea Party
---



Politicians, driven by faulty economic theories and their own political ambitions, are again thinking about taking the nation's reputation hostage and gambling with America's future. Yes, the Republicans seem to be planning another debt ceiling crisis. [According to the Los Angeles Times](http://web.archive.org/web/20130614000138/http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-debt-limit-20130510,0,7705505.story), the party's legislators want "tangible progress on overhauling the tax code" in return for a debt ceiling increase.

The debt ceiling limits the the number of government bonds that can be issued. Although a debt ceiling increase does not authorize additional spending, under current government practice, debt issue is needed to meet commitments already made by Congress. If the debt ceiling is not raised, the United States government will default on obligations committed to by existing law. The U.S Treasury would not be able to make payments on all government liabilities and programs, or would have to resort to unconventional means to fund the government deficit. Many major government programs would necessarily face rapid cuts. The economic consequences of such a default could be disastrous. Let's first look at what would have happened if the debt limit was not increased during the 2011 crisis. [According to CNN](http://money.cnn.com/2011/02/17/news/economy/debt_limit_spending_cuts/index.htm?iid=EL), the cuts required would have been equivalent to the any of the following: the amount spent on “all discretionary spending, including defense,” plus 50 billion dollars; 70 percent of the funds spent on Social Security or Medicare; or two-thirds of total government tax revenue.Additional cuts would have been needed to cover the government through 2012, or to account for the effect that depressed private spending would have had on the economy. Clearly, suddenly disbanding the military or ending Social Security would not be good policy. But unrealistic budget slashing of that magnitude is proposed when the Tea Party demands that their ideology rule the day, regardless of whether it's supported by sound economic theory or the majority of the nation's voters.
If the debt ceiling is not raised this year, the program cuts made necessary by this inaction will be very harsh. Budget reductions amounting to between four to five percent of GDP, or about one-half of those that would have been required during the 2011 crisis, will be necessary. Obviously, this would be very harmful. The decreases in government spending that would be required would also immediately reduce economic output. This is because decreases in government spending will directly reduce demand for products. The possible supply of goods and services in the current depressed economy is substantially greater than the demand for these goods. Therefore, an increase in demand will increase economic production in the current situation because businesses will have the capacity to absorb it. But if the debt ceiling isn't raised, just the opposite will happen. Demand and output will be reduced by a decrease in government spending because less money will be around to purchase American products. Government contracts with businesses may be canceled or the amount spent decreased. Benefit reductions will also lessen demand for goods and services. If food stamp benefits are reduced, grocery purchases will decrease. Social Security and unemployment benefit recipients are all buyers of goods and services. With less money, they too will buy less.
In fact, the cuts can be expected to reduce demand more than just their raw value. And they would disproportionately harm the poor and middle class, who spend most of their income and have low rates of savings. One person's spending is another's income. Government programs like food stamps and unemployment benefits are extremely good at stimulating demand. [According to an article published in The Economist](http://www.economist.com/node/18958475), “When Moody’s Analytics assessed different forms of stimulus, it found that food stamps were the most effective, increasing economic activity by $1.73 for every dollar spent. Unemployment insurance came in second, at $1.62, whereas most tax cuts yielded a dollar or less.”
Failing to raise the debt ceiling would hurt the U.S. government and the economy in one other way that is even more detrimental than the effects of budget reductions. A default on government obligations would cause serious harm. A default would occur if the government failed to pay past commitments made by Congress. If the debt ceiling is not raised, the president and the treasury will be obligated to violate at least one law, either a law allocating funds to a government program, or the debt ceiling law itself. As the Supreme Court ruled in Train v. City of New York (1975), the treasury is obligated to disburse all funds allocated by Congress. The cuts made in this fashion will be made without public debate and will not be made through the regular political process. They will be made by orders made by executive branch officials. The ability for the public to debate and contest such cuts is limited and great legislative power–the ability to dissolve or dramatically reduce programs enacted by Congress– would be transferred to the executive.
The procedure to avoid default is simple. All Congress has to do is pass a debt ceiling extension. Debt ceiling raises have not been such intense issues in the past. [The debt ceiling has been raised 74 times since March 1962, before it became a major political issue](http://money.cnn.com/2011/01/03/news/economy/debt_ceiling_faqs/index.htm).All that is needed to avoid an economic crisis is a return to this previous pattern where debt ceiling votes are not held up as political tools.
This latest game from the Republican Party is just a simple shakedown that lacks even a superficial connection to fixing the debt. Instead of budget cuts, or a budget program, what is being demanded are changes to the fundamental structure of tax policy. The tax reform proposals supported by the Republicans will not reduce the debt, just change the distributional effects of the tax code in a way that benefits the wealthy. In fact, a majority of Republicans have signed a no-tax-increase pledge. Those truly concerned about the deficit would not be proposing tax cuts that would reduce government revenue.
Why not eliminate the deficit? A deficit is necessary at many times for two reasons. The first is that when the economy is below full-employment, government deficit spending is often the only way to restore the economy. The second is that [a government surplus necessarily means a private sector that is as a whole running a deficit](http://www.forbes.com/sites/johntharvey/2012/07/18/why-you-should-love-government-deficits/). By accounting identity, net (domestic) private savings equals the sum of the government deficit and the trade balance (positive if a trade surplus, negative if a trade deficit).The only way that the U.S government can be in surplus when there is a trade deficit is if, on average, households and domestic businesses are in deficit. Large private debts are inherently more harmful than government debts because households and businesses have finances that are much more constrained than the finances of the government.
Republicans have learned that shakedowns like this work because Obama has folded before. The majority of the Republican party has also been cowed by the risk of a primary challenge from the [28 percent of the population that supports the extremists of the Tea Party](http://www.gallup.com/poll/127181/tea-partiers-fairly-mainstream-demographics.aspx). It is high time that we stop this small minority from setting the nation's agenda. The fact that the Tea Party, and its supporters, want to risk irreparable, long-term damage to the nation to achieve short-term political goals makes such an extreme political movement unfit to govern.
