---
author: tjones
comments: false
date: 2014-01-11 21:31:49+00:00
layout: post
slug: poverty-2
title: What to Do About Poverty
wordpress_id: 1093
categories:
- old
tags:
- Lyndon Johnson
- Old
- Works Progress Administration
---

50 years ago this month Lyndon Johnson gave his War on Poverty speech, which was the beginning of most of the U.S government's anti-poverty programs. While these programs have made a clear dent in poverty, they have not come close to eliminating poverty. We need to do more. In this post I will detail how America can solve the poverty issue.



 
    
  1. The U.S government should commit to alleviating unemployment and maintaining full employment. This should include
 
    
    1. The creation of a Works Progress Administration style jobs program that would be able to offer every unemployed person who is willing and able to work a job at a living wage. This program would employ the workers on infrastructure programs, providing public services, and projects done in collaboration with private non-profit groups. This program should continue even after the effects of the recession are over.

    
    2. The government should provide grants to unemployed workers and low income individuals who intend to start a business. This program would evaluate proposals based on their cost, the number of people employed by the businesses, and the benefit to the public that would be created by the proposals.

    
    3. The U.S government should aggressively use monetary policy to encourage private investment. This should include a continuation of the zero interest rate policy -- possibly indefinitely.

    
    4. The government should aggressively use fiscal policy to keep the economy at full employment. This should include increased deficits when the economy is sluggish and reduced deficits/ surpluses when there is a high risk of inflation.

 


  

    
  2. The current set of anti-poverty programs[ should be replaced with a basic income](http://web.archive.org/web/20140326141202/https://theojones.name/index.php/2013/09/17/best-way-eliminate-poverty-united-states/) program that would provide a universal cash grant to all U.S adult citizens that is delivered unconditionally and without means testing  .

    
  3. [A universal health care system should be adopted. ](http://web.archive.org/web/20140326141811/https://theojones.name/index.php/2014/01/05/done-u-s-health-care-system/)


