---
author: tjones
comments: false
date: 2014-07-21 07:36:11+00:00
layout: post
slug: early-doubts-about-the-future-of-fossil-fuel-energy-supply-2
title: Early Doubts about the Future of Fossil Fuel Energy Supply
wordpress_id: 1141
categories:
- old
tags:
- Black Fog
- City Whilst
- London
- Old
- Smoke Abatement Committee
---

_This post is part of a series [on the history of the politics of sustainable energy](https://theojones.name/index.php/blog-post-series-on-the-history-of-sustainable-energy-and-climate-change-politics/)_

Concerns about the sustainability of fossil fuel energy have a long history that goes back almost 150 years. However, some of these early concerns were focused not on the environmental impact of coal or other fossil fuels, but were instead focused on the risk that we could run out of these fuels. Additionally, concerns about the environmental impact of coal are almost as old as the widespread consumption of the fuel.

In 1865 the [economist William Stanley Jevons penned his book](http://www.econlib.org/library/YPDBooks/Jevons/jvnCQ.html) _The Coal Question; An Inquiry Concerning the Progress of the Nation, and the Probable Exhaustion of Our Coal Mines_. In that book Jevons argued that England would run out of domestic coal supplies, and would therefore either be dependent on imports, or would have to cut back on industrialization. He argued that this would be a long-run threat to Great Britain's status as a global power. Jevons predicted that the U.K had only 90 billions tons of coal available in 1865. If economic growth persisted at the rate he guessed, this coal would be exhausted by the end of the 20th century and the country would be dependent on imported fossil fuels. He made the following projection of coal consumption, production, and imports, from 1870 to 1970.

These predictions largely came true. The U.K [only has about 400 million tons of coal left](http://www.coal.gov.uk/media//286DC/CA-AnnualReport-0607.pdf). Production of coal peaked during World War 1. However, consumption of coal has not budged. The Association for UK Coal Importers estimates that Britain consumed 60.7 million tons of coal in 2013, 49.4 million of which were imported. [They further guess that](http://www.coalimp.org.uk/4.html) "Proven world coal reserves amount to around 900 billion tonnes". However, other sources indicate that coal production [will likely peak around 2020](http://e360.yale.edu/feature/peak_coal_why_the_industrys_dominance_may_soon_be_over/2777/), even without explicit policy to reduce coal use.

Jevons though that reductions in the supply of coal would cause dramatic rises in its price, "The exhaustion of our mines will be marked _pari passu_ by a rising cost or value of coal; and when the price has risen to a certain amount comparatively to the price in other countries, our main branches of trade will be doomed" (Chapter V, paragraph 2). However, coal prices have been surprisingly stable over history. [A study of the cost of coal in the United States between ](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421511000474)[1882 and 2006 found](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421511000474) that "The price of coal appears to fluctuate more or less randomly" and that there is no general long term trend in the cost of the mineral. Coal has become a global market so this cost is quite uniform across the world. 

Jevons also examined the "supposed substitutes of coal" -- energy through wind, water, and biomass -- and considered them to be less than satisfactory, saying "The first great requisite of motive power is, that it shall be wholly at our command, to be exerted when and where and in what degree we desire" (paragraph 13 of Chapter VIII). This concern is today known as the intermittentcy problem -- wind, water, and solar energy sources can not be produced on demand. Jevons claimed that deploying these sources would mean "carrying the work to the power, not the power to the work" (paragraph 23 of Chapter VIII). It is fair to say that we now know ways to [mitigate the intermittentcy problem of renewable energy sources](http://www.skepticalscience.com/renewable-energy-baseload-power-advanced.htm), such as an electric grid coupled with storage and a mix of power sources (although this comes at a substantial price tag), plus modern scientists now know how to harness nuclear power (which lacks the intermittency issue all together). However, despite the advances in technology made since 1865, intermittency is still a non-trivial problem for wind, water, and solar energy sources, and a strong argument in favor of nuclear power.

In _The Coal Question _Jevons introduced his famous paradox --- the argument that increasing the efficiency of energy usage actually increases the usage of energy. This comes from the fact that energy is a cost of using a good or service. Energy efficiency reduces this cost.  What do consumers do when the cost of something they want goes down? They consume more of it. For this reason a pure focus on energy efficiency is insufficient to restrain excessive consumption of fossil fuels. Jevons's paradox is well known but its implications are unappreciated.

Irrespective of its supply, concerns about the environmental impact of coal are as old as its use. [In ](http://66.147.244.135/~enviror4/ancient/middle-ages/)[1306 King ](http://66.147.244.135/~enviror4/ancient/middle-ages/)Edward I restricted the burning of coal inorder to limit air pollution. In the 17th century John Evelyn correctly identified coal burning as the source of London's air pollution and wrote _Fumifugium: Or, the Inconvenience of the Aer, and Smoake of London Dissipated_, a policy proposal to the King and Parliament  on the matter. He described the pollution of London as follows _“The immoderate use of, and indulgence to, sea-coale in the city of London exposes it to one of the fowlest inconveniences and reproaches that can possibly befall so noble and otherwise incomparable City… Whilst they are belching it forth their sooty jaws, the City of London resembles the face rather of Mount Aetna, the Court of Vulcan… or the suburbs of Hell than an assembly of rational creatures” _ He called the presence of this pollution a "pernicious Nuance" and noted that the responsible coal has "a kind of virulent or arsenical vapour arising from it”. He noted that other cities, such as Paris did not have a pollution problem as horrendous. In Evelyn's opinion, not only was this smog a nuisance, but it also posed health risks. He recommended containing the bad air (keep in mind that the miasma theory of disease was in use in the 17th century ) produced by this smoke by planting “odiferous flowers” to "tinge the air". These flowers were eventually planted. This solution of course failed to contain the smoke, and London retained its pollution problem. In 1873 London [suffered a "Black Fog"](http://web.archive.org/web/20140305113926/http://www.bloombergview.com:80/articles/2013-10-31/china-s-smog-can-t-compete-with-london-s-pea-soup) that covered the city in a thick smoky haze, limited visibility in some areas to a few feet, and caused about 700 deaths. In response a Smoke Abatement Committee was formed to come up with policy measures to contain the problem.[The Committee recommended](http://www.1902encyclopedia.com/S/SMO/smoke-abatement.html) a policy of abatement of the problem through installing filters on industrial equipment, a transition to liquid fuels, use of natural gas as an alternative to coal,  and a switch to forms of coal that burn cleaner. As a testament to how wide spread the problem of coal pollution is, the Committee notes a history of past technology innovations, and legislation  to mitigate this issue.  





<blockquote>In 1785 the first smoke-abating invention was patented by James Watt, who, as the inventor of the steam-engine, is responsible for so many boiler fires and so much consump-tion of coal. In 1815 Cutler patented the first would-be smokeless grate for domestic purposes; and his principle of feeding underneath was afterwards adopted by Dr Neil Arnott in a grate which has now been in use in one form or another for more than half a century. There is now a vast number of such inventions, good and bad. In 1819 the attention of parliament was directed to the question, and a select committee was appointed "to inquire how far persons using steam-engines and furnaces could erect them in a manner less prejudicial to public health and comfort." This committee gave an encouraging report. In 1843 another select committee recommended the introduction of a bill prohibiting the production of smoke from furnaces and steam-engines. In 1845 yet another select committee reported that such an Act could not in the existing state of affairs be made to apply to dwelling-houses.</blockquote>
