---
author: tjones
comments: true
date: 2014-07-26 09:53:54+00:00
layout: post
slug: synthetic-oil-during-world-war-2
title: Synthetic Oil During World War 2
wordpress_id: 750
categories:
- old
tags:
- Elsevier Science
- germany
- IG
- Old
- World War
---

_[This is part of a blog post series on climate change.](https://theojones.name/blog-post-series-on-the-history-of-sustainable-energy-and-climate-change-politics/)____In this post I am using a new way of doing citations that I will use in some of my longer posts. The citations can be found at the end notes/_During the interwar period and in World War 2 the German government placed heavy emphasis on fnding ways to synthesize fuel. Most of this research focused around the Fischer-Tropsch process [1, 26-29] and the Bergius process [2]. The Bergius process is able to hydrogenate coal, and other sources of carbon, and turn them into hydrocarbons. The Fischer-Tropsch process is able to synthesize hydrocarbons from carbon monoxide/carbon dioxide and hydrogen, with a input of energy. In the German program the CO2 and the energy came from coal. The Fischer-Tropsch process process was invented by Franz Fischer and Hans Tropsch in the 1920s at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Coal Research. Germany' s frst commercial use of the process came in 1935.German company Ruhrchemie AG saw the process as a way to add value to surplus coal and in 1934 bought the patents for the process. Hitler saw an even more expansive use for the method, German energy independence, and commissioned large scale construction of such plants. By November of 1935 almost 800000 barrels of [1, 26-27]. This production didn't just include fuel, but also included non-fuel oil based products. These include rubber, alcohols, aldehydes, soft waxes and detergents. Coal hydrogenation was the preferred process for producing gasoline and aviation fuel, while the Fischer-Tropsch process was preferred for other fuels [3, 148]. However, the Fischer-Tropsch process is capable of producing either. The production of synthetic oil would turn out tobe critical to the war effort, as Germany has no supply of natural oil. This was part of a massive program to reconstruct German military power, and to promote a mircentilist trade policy. The World War One experience showed the dependence that Germany had of foreign goods. Furthermore, Germany had trouble obtaining the hard currency needed to import natural oil and the nation's government was concerned that global oil supplies could run out (both during the Weimar and Nazi periods). By 1938 of the war Germany was targeting a production of 38 million barrels of these fuels per year however there were some diffculties in actiuly meeting this production goal, and persistent labor shortages during the war. Actual 1938 production was about 10 million barrels, and 1943 production was 36 million barrels [5]. This prewar build-up received substantial investment from foreign firms, particularly American firms. Additionally, U.S firms (which were much more sophisticated at refinning oil) provided some needed technology. A report from the Commercial Attach of the U.S. Embassy in Berlin in 1933 stated "In two gears Germany will be manufacturing oil and gas enough out of soft coal for a long war. The Standard Oil of New York is furnishing millions of dollars to help." A memorandum from IG Farben, a major producter of fuels with the FT process, stated [6]
"The closing of an agreement with Standard was necessary for tech nical, commercial, and financial reasons,technically, because the specialized experience which was available only in a big oil company was necessary to the further development of our process, and no such industry existed in Germany; commercially, because in the absence of state economic control in Germany at that time, IG had to avoid a competitive struggle with the great oil powers, who always sold the best gasoline at the lowest price in contested markets; financially, because IG, which had already spent extraordinarily large sums for the development of the process, had to seek financial relief in order to be able to continue development in other new technical fields, such as buna. .... By reason of their decades of work on motor fuels, the Americans were ahead of us in their knowledge of the quality requirements that are called for by the different uses of motor fuels. In particular they had developed, at great expense, a large number of methods of testing gasoline for different uses. On the basis of their experiments they had recognized the good anti, knock quality of iso-octane long before they had any knowledge of our hydrogenation process. This is proved by the single fact that in America fuels are graded in octane numbers, and iso-octane was entered as the best fuel with the number 100. All this knowledge naturally became ours as a result of the agreement, which saved us much effort and protected us against many errors."  /blockquote>
Why is the previous discussion in a history of German synthetic fuels during World War 2 relevant to a book on climate change? The Fischer-Tropsch process turns out to be one of the few ways known to produce sustainable fuels. It is a versatile process. The energy source it uses can be almost anything. Modern proposals based around the Fischer-Tropsch process often use nuclear energy or renewable sources  7 . Usually these modern proposals proposals argue for at first using the exhaust from coal plants as the CO2 source, and as these are decommissioned switching to sequestered atmospheric CO2  7 . This CO2 could be collected from an array of land based collecting stations  8  (spaced in a similar way as wind power generators  9 ), or could collect from the more concentrated CO2 in the ocean  10 .  11 . The cost of fuels produced in this fashion would up to $6 a gallon and possibly as low as $3 a gallon with modern techniques  10 .

References
 1  A. Steynberg and M. Dry, Fischer-Tropsch Technology, ser. Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis. Elsevier Science, 2004.  Online . Available:[http://books.google.com/books?id=gJfVfbd1Bd0C](http://books.google.com/books?id=gJfVfbd1Bd0C)
 2  T. P. Hughes, Technological momentum in history: Hydrogenation in germany 1898-1933," Past and Present, pp. 106{132, 1969.  3  A. Stranges, Germanys synthetic fuel industry, 1927{1945," in The German Chemical Industry in the Twentieth Century. Springer, 2000, pp.147{216.  4  World crude oil consumption by year (thousand barrels per day). Online . Available: [http://www.indexmundi.com/energy.aspx](http://www.indexmundi.com/energy.aspx)  5  P. Becker, The role of synthetic fuel in world war ii germany," Air University Review, 1981.  6  A. Sutton, Wall Street and the Rise of Hitler. Clairview Books, 2010. Online . Available: [http://books.google.com/books?id=Q0amI9GmIe8C](http://books.google.com/books?id=Q0amI9GmIe8C)  7  D. Doty and S. Shevgoor, Windfuels{competitive transportation fuels from wind energy and waste co2," in paper 330c, AIChE Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, 2008.  8  E. A. Parson and D. W. Keith, Fossil fuels without co2 emissions," Science, vol. 282, no. 5391, pp. 1053{1054, 1998.  9  K. S. Lackner, P. Grimes, and H.-J. Ziock, Capturing carbon dioxide from air," 2001.  10  P. Daniel, Fueling the feet, navy looks to the seas."  Online . Available: [http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2012/fueling-the-fleet-navy-looks-to-the-seas](http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2012/fueling-the-fleet-navy-looks-to-the-seas)  11  By, Goodbye, oil: US navy cracks new renewable energy technology to turn seawater into fuel, allowing ships to stay at sea longer," Apr. 2014.  Online . Available: http://www.ibtimes.com/goodbye-oil-us-navy-cracks-new-renewable-energy-technology-turn-seawater-fuel-allowing-15684553




