---
author: tjones
comments: false
date: 2014-07-24 13:44:37+00:00
layout: post
slug: climate-change-science-now-2
title: Climate Change Science Now
wordpress_id: 1149
categories:
- old
tags:
- American Psychological Association
- American Sociological Association
- IPCC
- Old
- Pew Research Center
---

_This post is part of a series [on the history of the politics of sustainable energy](https://theojones.name/index.php/blog-post-series-on-the-history-of-sustainable-energy-and-climate-change-politics/)   

_

In this post I will discuss the current state of climate science. I will also show that there is a broad consensus among climate scientists that global warming is happening, is human caused and is harmful. I will also show that there is wide agreement about this in both the natural sciences as a whole, and in the social sciences.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was created in 1988 to study the possibility of climate change and its impacts [1. See page 2 of Archer, David, and Rahmstorf. The Climate Crisis: An Introductory Guide to Climate Change]. The first IPCC report, published in 1990, found that a human-caused increase in global temperatures was likely, but not conclusive. The IPCC also found that the evidence should be conclusive within a decade. In their 2007 assessment on the physical science basis of climate change the IPCC found that levels of three greenhouse gasses, carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide, in the atmosphere had increased dramatically since the industrial revolution. According to the IPCC, these increases in greenhouse gasses have warmed and changed the climate and are human caused with a very high probability. Out of the three, the effect of carbon dioxide is the most significant. Most CO2 emissions come from the burning of fossil fuels. Changes to the climate, caused by these gasses, will affect sea ice levels, create extreme weather patterns, and increase sea levels. Global temperatures have increased to a level not exceeded for the last 125,000 years. Current changes to the climate will have effects that could last for hundreds of years. If measures are not taken to reduce current emissions levels, significant additional climate change will almost certainly happen. [A 2012 report by the World Bank](http://climatechange.worldbank.org/content/climate-change-report-warns-dramatically- warmer-world-century) found that if no actions are taken to mitigate climate change, then the climate will warm by at least 4 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels (climate during the year 1500).This will be a roughly equivalent level of climatic change as the difference between the last ice age and late 19 th century levels. [The difference between the ice-age temperatures and late 19th century levels](http://www.exploratorium.edu/climate/primer/index.html) is between 4.2 C and 4.6 C. A 2009 paper _(A Safe Operating Space for Humanity_ by Rockström et. al.) found that maintaining a climate and global ecosystem that is fundamentally similar to the one that has existed over the last 10,000 years will require the change in radiative forcing to be limited to 1 watt per square meter-- roughly equivalent to limiting CO 2 levels to 350 parts per-million. This is compared to current levels of 1.5 watts per square meter and approximately 390 parts per million. The same paper also found that biodiversity loss has already increased to more than 10 times a sustainable/desirable level and found human-caused disruptions to the nitrogen cycle that exceeded what ecosystems can sustain without severe disruption. More than 84 percent of scientists in all fields (including ones unrelated to climate change) agree that climate change is happening and is human caused according to [a survey by the Pew Research center](http://www.people- press.org/2009/07/09/public-praises-science-scientists-fault-public-media/).There is a general consensus on climate change among researchers in the natural sciences and a similar consensus exists in three social sciences: psychology, anthropology and sociology. Economics appears to be the one major field of science with a climate change skeptic majority. There is also a general consensus among researchers in the fields of engineering and health. Economics appears to be the one major field of science with a climate change skeptic majority.

There are few researchers in the natural sciences that reject the mainstream view on climate change. A 2010 survey (published as the article _Expert Credibility in Climate Change_ in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.) shows that between 97 and 98 percent of climate scientists agree that climate change is happening and is human caused.This shows that there is a consensus among experts about climate change, in contrast to the great doubt about climate change among the general public. It was also found that the expertise of the scientists who are climate change doubters-- as measured by the number of published papers in the field of climatology-- is substantially below that of the researchers who accept the mainstream view. The report by the Pew Research Center studied the views of both members of the American general public and of scientists (from both the natural and social sciences) on issues relating to science. It found that Americans have high opinions of scientists and their work, but still disagree with the typical views of scientists on many important issues-- including the reality of human-caused climate change. Eighty-four percent of the scientists that Pew polled, selected from professional members of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, believe that human-caused climate change is happening.

No major scientific body in the natural sciences or medicine disagrees   

with the mainstream climate change view [2. See page 68 of DiMento, Joseph F., and Pamela Doughman Climate Change: What It Means for Us, Our Children, and Our Grandchildren ]. A 2004 review of all 928 abstracts on climate change, published between 1993 and 2003, and included in the Institute for Scientific Information database, found that no article disputed the mainstream view on human-caused climate change. However, approximately 25% of the articles took a neutral view on this issue. [3. See Oreskes, Naomi, and Erik M. Conway. Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming. New York: Bloomsbury, 2010.]

Viewpoints in the social sciences are more divided. Researchers in public health,psychology, anthropology and sociology generally agree with the mainstream view on human-caused climate change. However, a substantial number of economists object to the mainstream view. Three major U.S-based associations in the social sciences, [the American Anthropological Association](http://www.aaanet.org/cmtes/commissions/CCTF/gcctf.cfm) [4. See Fiske, Shirley J. “AAA Global Climate Change Task Force Takes Shape.” Anthropology News Nov. 2011: 46], the [American Psychological Association](http://www.apa.org/science/about/publications/climate-change.aspx), and the [American Sociological Association](http://www.asanet.org/about/taskforces/sociology_and_global_climate_change.cfm) have released statements or reports concurring with the mainstream view on human-caused climate change. Economists show a more skeptical view towards the mainstream natural science view of climate change impacts. [A 2009 literature review of estimates of the total economic effects of climate change](http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.23.2.29), published in major economics journals and written by economists, found that all but one took a denialist view of climate change, finding little or positive impacts of climate change. According to the same review, papers focusing on the cost of each ton of CO2 emitted found a general opinion of low, but non-zero impacts. This economics literature generally suggests that current climate change mitigation efforts in the European Union are too aggressive and will likely cost more than the effects that they attempt to prevent. The review found that in economics “estimates of the economic effects of greenhouse gas emissions have become less pessimistic over time. For the studies listed here, the estimates become less negative by 0.23 percent of GDP per year in which the study was done...Projections of future emissions and future climate change have become less severe over time—even though the public discourse has become shriller”. A 2008 paper by Frank Ackerman (_Climate Economics in Four Easy Pieces_ in the journal _Development_) argued that economists misuse discounting, an accounting technique whereby costs incurred in the future are weighted lower than more recently incurred costs, and therefore underestimate the costs of climate change. Additionally, most economic analyses of the effects of climate change use the most likely outcome of climate change. However, it may be better to use less likely, higher risk outcomes as the basis for policy making for the same reasons that a business would buy insurance against a low risk, but potentially very damaging outcome, such as a fire. The author also states that climate change impacts things that are socially valuable, but very difficult to price, such as endangered wildlife.
