---
author: tjones
comments: false
date: 2014-01-04 18:47:48+00:00
layout: post
slug: done-u-s-health-care-system-2
title: What should be done with the U.S health care system?
wordpress_id: 1083
categories:
- old
tags:
- ACA
- Congressional Budget Office
- Federal Trade Commission
- Old
- United States
---

America should have universal healthcare available to all residents of the country at an affordable price. I believe that the United States healthcare system should be a public insurance system-- one where a government agency is the sole provider of basic health insurance. This basic health coverage should replace Medicare, Medicaid, and the health insurance provisions of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). But some fees should still be charged to patients based on income, ability to pay, and the type of healthcare used. This would prevent overuse of healthcare services. Payments to healthcare providers, such as physicians, should generally be on a fixed salary basis. That is, doctors would be paid a salary, instead of a payment for each appointment or service provided. Additionally, hospital care should be transitioned to a public provider system operated by local governments and funded by the federal government through its insurance system. I also propose a drastic reform of the pharmaceutical industry that includes eliminating patents on drugs and instead funding medical research through government spending, which I will discuss in a follow up post. The role of private insurance companies should be limited to payment for healthcare not covered by the government plan.  

<!-- more -->

There are two primary goals that I believe a healthcare system should focus on:   

1. A healthcare system should provide necessary healthcare in an equitable fashion and should limit costs paid by the patients to a level within their ability to pay. This necessary healthcare includes primary care, hospital care, medications, dental care and psychiatric care, as well as nursing home and hospice care. However, currently, [the American healthcare system does not provide sufficient affordable coverage to all. As of 2012, 48 million Americans lacked health insurance, according to the U.S Census Bureau](http://web.archive.org/web/20140713035618/https://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/income_wealth/cb13-165.html). [The implementation of the ACA is expected to reduce this by just 18 million, according to the Congressional Budget Office](http://web.archive.org/web/20140110020309/http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/44190_EffectsAffordableCareActHealthInsuranceCoverage_2.pdf). This will still leave approximately 30 million without health insurance. The problem of uninsured Americans could be solved by the universal health care system that I'm proposing, which would provide healthcare to all U.S. citizens.   

2. A healthcare system should promote maximally efficient and cost- effective use of healthcare resources while maintaining quality of care. When consistent with the other goals, individuals should pay some of the the costs of the healthcare services they use consistent with their income and ability to pay. This is necessary to discourage overconsumption of healthcare services and to discourage people from taking actions that increase their risk of health problems. These actions may include some risky activities such as smoking.   

Neither goal is achieved by the current health care system. Patients are encouraged to over consume health care services because a third party, such as an insurer, often ends up paying the bill. This overconsumption of healthcare can be the result of patient demands for unneeded medical services made without consideration of the cost of the treatment. Healthcare providers are encouraged to over supply healthcare because the fee-for-service payment method used by most of the American healthcare system rewards healthcare providers for each service provided and because consumers of healthcare services have little knowledge of the nature of the care or services provided to them. A healthcare system with a single public health payer, which reimburses providers on a fixed-rate basis, but charges patients fees based on their healthcare use (if they are able to pay), will best be able to create incentives that minimize overconsumption. While any system that provides universal coverage will face overconsumption issues, a system that has patients pay for a portion of their healthcare usage commensurate with their ability to pay will minimize these issues. Fees can serve as a reminder to the patient that there are costs for healthcare services and can act as an incentive to take these costs into account.   

     Fees charged to the patients as part of this system should go into a general healthcare fund, not to the provider. This system would create the positive incentives found in both fee-for-service systems and in fixed-rate systems. I believe this  proposed system would reduce healthcare overconsumption issues because in the current healthcare system insurance plans generally cover a large portion of health expenses, even if the patient can afford to pay more out of pocket.   

    A core way of achieving the goals of providing necessary healthcare in an equitable, as well as in an efficient and cost-effective manner, while maintaining quality care, is through a government insurer with universal, tax-funded coverage.   

Goal one, providing necessary healthcare in an equitable fashion, would be met because under my proposed public health insurance system, healthcare would be provided to all  with costs commensurate with a patient's ability to pay, The public insurance plan would, however, include co-pays, deductibles, and other fees set based on ability to pay and the nature of the health care provided. These would exist to discourage overuse of health care, discourage use of inferior or more expensive health care options, and to internalize as much of the burden of actions that increase the risk of higher health expenditures. Wealthy individuals would receive much more limited government paid coverage.  I propose that this should be done through attaching a deductible to the government provided basic plan that would be set based on a percentage of the patient's income minus the poverty limit. Those with incomes equal to, or less than, the poverty line will face no deductible. However, those with higher incomes will face gradually higher deductibles. This basic government plan can be supplemented by private insurance and savings. Co-pays could be assessed on treatment methods that are known to have more effective or less expensive alternatives.   

Goal two, promoting efficiency and cost-effectiveness would be met in three ways. First, under my proposal, with the entire nation on the same healthcare system, there would be economies of scale. A public payer will serve almost all of the patients in the market and, therefore, be able to maximize these economies of scale. With so many private and nonprofit entities providing services in our current healthcare system, there is much redundancy in administrative costs. The administrative costs of an insurer most strongly correlates with its size, as there are many fixed costs in the U.S insurance market.   

Therefore, it can be expected that public payer administrative costs would be less. For example, the administrative costs of private insurance companies is on average about 14 percent of total expenditures. However, Medicare has administrative costs of about four percent.   

    A second way that the proposed system would be more cost-effective is that a public payer would have have strong bargaining power with health care providers and would be able to negotiate prices downward. This is because almost all health care purchases will be conducted through this payer and any firm that does not negotiate with it will have a strongly limited market share. The potential benefits of this are very high.   

    The third way a public payer would be more efficient is that it would have the ability to significantly influence healthcare and promote cost-effective techniques and methodologies by using its negotiating power.   

    I believe that hospital care in the United States should gradually be transitioned to a public system operated by local governments. Health care provision has multiple issues that make public provision a possibly more efficient option. First of all, hospital markets are very concentrated and have limited competition. A 2011 study found,  that by the Federal Trade Commission's definition, most hospital markets are highly, or very highly, concentrated (Robinson).  In a choice between a private monopolistic market and a public monopoly, the public monopoly will be more accountable to consumers because government officials have to face elections, while the owners of a private monopoly are motivated mostly by profitability.  Also, consumers often lack the knowledge to fully understand the comparative value of the various healthcare options available, so in any market there are many opportunities to profit from this lack of knowledge. Just as there are many economies of scale on the payment side of the healthcare industry, there are many ways that a public provider can become more efficient due to being the main provider in an area.
