---
author: tjones
comments: true
date: 2015-06-04 05:05:08+00:00
layout: post
slug: causes-of-internet-trolling
title: Causes of Internet Trolling
wordpress_id: 2319
tags:
- IP
---

I think that issues with harassment, trolling and such on the internet are more common than in the offline world for two reasons. The first is that there is less accountability in the online world. Identities on the Internet are easily replaceable and expendable. This is not simply anonymity. Anonymity and accountability can coexist to a large degree. It is possible to be tied to an identity that is not your real name while still having a lot of stake in the continued reputation of that identity. The lack of accountability on the Internet is due to the lack of consequences for bad behavior. When a troll can just re-create a sock puppet account on the community he was banned from in order to troll again that's lack of accountability. When a Russian spammer can spew junk from easily replaceable IP addresses, that's lack of accountability. And the persistent lack of accountability and the easy replace ability of online identities is a major enabling factor in Internet harassment. If identities on the Internet had a strong cost to them trolls could no longer create burner accounts and would be substantially limited the damage he could do. Internet identity is a weird thing, sloughs few goods that is not scarce enough for the good of the public. If internet identities were scarcer, there would be less trolling. In the long run, although it is somewhat impractical to implement in the short term, the solution will be to make Internet identities scarcer. Create an Internet authentication service, which sells Internet identities and their authentication for a substantial but not prohibitive amount of money, like let's say, $50. This would prevent burner accounts. This may be a good role for a government agency. It would make banning users from Internet communities more effective. It would make it possible for different Internet communities to blacklist persistent trolls in a coordinated way. And it would add a substantial cost to trolling. The second factor that I think is huge and the growth of trolling and Internet harassment is the rise of content silos like Facebook and twitter. These websites are parked in the weird intermediate between web hosts/ISPs true Internet communities. A true Internet community like a forum or mailing list is perfectly able to just ban problem users, there are no shared subcommunities with different values. There are alternate routes for controversial speech. Web hosts in the other hand don't even need to deal with the content moderation issue. And web host, quite frankly, shouldn't even deal with what their users post as long as it's legal. There are limited ways that one user of a web host could damage the others. Content silos exist in a weird double state. They are too much like web hosts to be able to affect consistent moderation, they are close enough to proper Internet communities for problem users to be able to cause trouble for others. In short, content silos are the perfect outlet for the troll. They have very limited accountability for their actions, but plenty of room to do damage. As far as I can tell about the only way to prevent this effect is to get rid of such content silos. Centralizing massive amounts of Internet communities like the way that Facebook, twitter, Reddit and such does was bound to be a recipe for disaster. Content silos should be replaced with the decentralized web of yesteryear. Separate communities have their own websites that are isolated from others. The personal website should return. And decentralized protocols should replace the task done by social networking systems like messaging, contact management and profiles. This would allow more fine-grained control the side of the users, a more difficult situation for trolls.
