---
author: tjones
comments: true
date: 2015-01-18 08:51:38+00:00
layout: post
slug: is-science-denialism-just-a-right-wing-problem-2
title: Is science denialism just a right wing problem?
wordpress_id: 1489
tags:
- GMO
---

The idea that antiscience tendencies are just a right-wing thing is often presented. In this post I will argue that science denialism is as big a problem for the left as for the right. The right wing examples of this are clear and blatant; creationism, climate change skepticism, issues excepting basic public health knowledge, and so on. However, the left has its own skeletons in the closet. Antiscience is something that comes out of ideology. Strict ideology and partisanship is the mind killer. In some ideological fact become such a part of someone's worldview that is beyond reproach them, denial of facts is a simple consequence. Many people want a world where the facts neatly aligned with their political beliefs, as these beliefs that come stronger, more partisan, more ideological the contradictions between the belief and the real world will become more acute. A vast portion of the antiscience tendencies and current politics come from this tendency. It is easy to try to adjust the facts to your belief, instead of the other way around. The only way to prevent people from denying basic facts of science is to train people to be rational and to put behind partisanship and ideology when the facts clearly contradict deeply held beliefs. It's not primarily a problem of lack of education, [studies have looked at this and found that generally education is little to do with science denying tendencies and can in fact make them worse in some cases](http://arstechnica.com/science/2015/01/education-plus-ideology-exaggerates-rejection-of-reality/), it's a problem of politics and people. The fact that people often deny reality conflicts with their subjective viewpoint creates something I've heard called "crank magnetism". Crackpot ideas are rarely alone, and someone who believes one crank theory likely believes another. Really, I think politics has a lot to with this. A lot of people don't want to accept facts that are inconvenient to their political ideology. And some people are more likely to reject facts to preserve their ideology than others. Just in my contacts, I've noticed a lot of overlap between global warming denialism ,creationism, and general conspiracy theories (new world order, Illuminati , birtherism, Agenda 21, moon landing hoax, etc...) . These people tend to be politically right wing. I've also noticed a left-wing crank cluster. Anti-GMO crap, alternative medicine, homeopathy, vitalism, problems accepting some basic principles of economics (this last one could probably be put as both an issue of the left-wing and right-wing, but it's probably more problematic in the left, I'll discuss more about how people's understandings of economics can elucidate a lot about how people come to deny facts in a later post) and a general persistence of Freudian type psychoanalytic ideas in much of left-wing  (particularly feminist academic theory). Additionally[, persistence of so-called "postmodernist" ideas in left-wing theory also tell us a lot about antiscience in the left](http://old.richarddawkins.net/articles/824-postmodernism-disrobed). Anti-vaccine nonsense seems to be the one overlap between the two. I will go into a bit more about that left-wing crackpot cluster.




  1. As I have discussed earlier in this blog, opposition to genetically modified foods from the left is absurd and reflective of many the antiscience trends in the left. Pretty much every major public health organization in the world is concluded there is little risk to the health of the public from GM foods. In fact, there is quite a bit of potential from this technology. And use of genetic modification by many accounts has increased agricultural yields. While there are some legitimate issues of the current deployment of technologies, there are few issues that are unique to this industry (anti-GMO activists will often point out the patent trolling by many companies in this industry, but patent trolling is becoming pretty common across the tech world). And there is pretty much no scientific basis to GMO bans or GMO labeling mandates, in fact many GMO labeling proposals produce substantial constitutional issues.

  2. Certain types of hipster left-wingers seem strongly attracted to alternative medicine. But there is a reason why most alternative medicine is "alternative". It doesn't work. Medicine that works is just called "medicine". Homeopathy is a particular type of alternative medicine that has a very large following. The scientific evidence on the subject unequivocally indicates that homeopathy treatments simply put, do not work at all, in fact the core theories of homeopathy violate fundamental principles of physics, chemistry, and biology. Homeopathy treatments are usually diluted to such an extent and there is little to no active ingredient actually present in the tincture. The problem with alternative medicine is that it's use tends to displace real medicine. People waste money on quacks instead of seeing real doctors for their issues. Money and lives are put at risk. And due to opposition from the left that attempts to regulate alternative medicine, little is done to stop this damage.

  3. Embedded in both the opposition to GMOs and the belief in alternative medicine is a pseudo-vitalism. A lot of people believe in some kind of inherent life force found in living things that is not found elsewhere. There is, of course, absolutely no scientific evidence for such a thing.

  4. I'll discuss some of the issues of economics in a later post.

  5. The pseudoscientific tendencies much of critical theory and the like is clear. A lot of this very embeds a pseudoscientific quasi-Freudian understanding of human psychology, particularly the idea of the deep subconscious which is reflected by people's thoughts and the media in the art that results from these thoughts. Since this is a detailed enough subject to be worth quite a bit more time than I could give it in this single post, I will probably write an additional post on the subject.

